.TH BM 1 "2026-06-11" "basic-memory" "Basic Memory Manual"
.SH NAME
bm \- local-first knowledge base for humans and AI agents
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bm
.I COMMAND
.RI [ ARGS ]...
.br
.B basic-memory
.I COMMAND
.RI [ ARGS ]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bm
manages Basic Memory projects: plain markdown files that form a knowledge
graph. Files are the source of truth; SQLite provides indexing and
full-text search; the same operations are exposed to AI agents over the
Model Context Protocol (MCP) and to humans and scripts through this CLI.
.PP
Notes use semantic markdown: observations
.RB ( "\- [category] text #tag" )
and relations
.RB ( "\- relation_type [[Target]]" )
become queryable graph structure. Projects route independently to the
local API or to Basic Memory Cloud.
.SH COMMANDS
Knowledge operations:
.TP
.B bm tool
CLI access to the MCP tools (write-note, read-note, search-notes,
build-context, ...). These emit JSON and are the scriptable surface.
.TP
.B bm status
Show sync status between files and the database.
.TP
.B bm reindex
Index local file changes and rebuild search/embeddings. This is the manual
sync trigger when no MCP server is running.
.TP
.B bm doctor
Run end-to-end file/database consistency checks.
.TP
.B bm orphans
List entities with no relations in the knowledge graph.
.TP
.B bm format
Run configured formatters over note files.
.PP
Projects and schemas:
.TP
.B bm project
Add, remove, list projects; set the default; flip a project between local
and cloud routing.
.TP
.B bm schema
List, validate, infer, and drift-check Picoschema note-type contracts.
.PP
Data and cloud:
.TP
.B bm import
Import from ChatGPT, Claude, or memory.json exports. Imports write files;
run
.B bm reindex
afterwards.
.TP
.B bm cloud
Authenticate, sync (push/pull/sync/bisync), snapshots, and team workspace
administration.
.PP
Infrastructure:
.TP
.B bm mcp
Run the MCP server (hosts the live file watcher).
.TP
.B bm man
Manage these man pages
.RB ( "bm man install" ).
.TP
.B bm reset
Drop and recreate the database (destructive).
.PP
Most commands accept
.B \-\-project
.I NAME
to target a project and
.BR \-\-local / \-\-cloud
to override routing.
.SH EXAMPLES
Write and find a note from the shell:
.PP
.nf
.RS
echo "# Standup notes" | bm tool write-note \\
    \-\-title "Standup" \-\-folder notes
bm tool search-notes "standup"
.RE
.fi
.PP
Pick up files created outside the tools:
.PP
.nf
.RS
bm status            # shows project-index observation
bm reindex           # runs project indexing
.RE
.fi
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.basic-memory/config.json
Projects, default project, per-project routing modes, cloud settings.
.TP
.I ~/.basic-memory/memory.db
SQLite index (derived; safe to rebuild with bm reindex).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B BASIC_MEMORY_FORCE_LOCAL
Force local routing regardless of cloud mode.
.TP
.B BASIC_MEMORY_LOG_LEVEL
Logging verbosity (e.g. DEBUG).
.SH SEE ALSO
Full manual (machine-readable, agent-traversable): the
.I manual
Basic Memory project \(em see docs/manual-pages.md in the repository.
Documentation: https://docs.basicmemory.com
.PP
For AI agents: the complete tool reference lives in the manual project as
section\-3 pages (write-note(3), search-notes(3), ...), queryable via
.B search_notes
with
.BR "metadata_filters={\(dqtype\(dq: \(dqmanpage\(dq}" .
.SH BUGS
https://github.com/basicmachines-co/basic-memory/issues
.SH AUTHORS
Basic Machines (https://basicmachines.co)
